Add spec for Trusted Publishers (OIDC auth for NuGet) (#13673)
NuGet/Home: accepted/2024/trusted-publishers-oidc-for-nuget-push.technical.md

Much of the technical explanation is described in [Trusted Publishers for All Package
Repositories](https://repos.openssf.org/trusted-publishers-for-all-package-repositories). I will expand on certain
technical details which are particularly interesting or specific to NuGet.

## Validation of the GitHub OIDC token

The most critical step in this design is understanding how NuGet.org will validate that an incoming OIDC token is
acceptable to trade for a short-lived NuGet API key.

The following checks are made:

- The token is issued by a known Trusted Publisher (only GitHub Actions at this time)
- The token is validated per all JWT rules, such as but not limited to:
  - valid signature via JWKS
  - validate duration (`nbf` and `exp` claims)
  - only used once, via `jti`
  - valid `aud` claim, being `nuget`

The
[Microsoft.IdentityModel.Protocols.OpenIdConnect](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.IdentityModel.Protocols.OpenIdConnect)
package can help us properly validate JWTs in our NuGet/NuGetGallery ASP.NET application.

In addition to the general JWT checks, specific checks are made for each Trusted Publisher. For GitHub Actions, the
following checks will be made:

> - `sub` claim matches `{repo owner}/{repo name}:.*` (case insensitive)

Reviewer: It's a bit difficult for me to understand what's variable and what's constant.  For example, this might be reworded to:

`sub` claim matches the regular expression pattern `{repo owner}/{repo name}:.*` where `{repo owner}` is the repository owner's name and `{repo name}` is the repository's name.  Then, I would understand `dtivel/myrepo:somepath` as a matching pattern.

(I inferred that `*` is something of a wildcard or maybe `.*` is a regular expression pattern, but I can't be certain from the spec.)

What would an actual `sub` look like?

Author: I expressed it as a regex. You're right, that's confusing. I'll clarify that and add a sample.

A branch `sub` would look like this: `repo:octo-org/octo-repo:ref:refs/heads/demo-branch`.

  - The suffix of the `sub` is implied by the other checks
- `repository_owner` claim matches the `{repo owner}` name (case insensitive)

> - `repository_owner_id` claim matches the numeric owner ID recorded at the time of the trust policy creation

Reviewer: This numeric owner ID is forge-assigned (here GitHub-assigned)?

Author: Yes, GitHub assigned.

I should note that other forges may not have a numeric owner ID. We will need to assess resurrection attacks or any other impersonation risks on a case by case basis.

  - This is to avoid resurrection attacks.
- `repository` claim matches the `{repo name}` name (case insensitive)

> - `repository_id` claim matches the numeric repository ID recorded at the time of the trust policy creation

Reviewer: This numeric repository ID is forge-assigned (here GitHub-assigned)?

Author: Yup, same as above https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/13673#discussion_r1711866688.

  - This is to avoid resurrection attacks.
- If a branch filter is provided in the trust policy:
  - `ref_type` claim must be `branch`

>   - `ref` claim must be `refs/head/{branch}` (case insensitive)

Reviewer: GitHub branch names are case sensitive.  You can have branches `test` and `TEST` simultaneously.

Author: Great catch, I will make that case sensitive!

- If an environment filter is provided in the trust policy:
  - `environment` claim must be `{environment}` (case insensitive)
- If a workflow path filter is provided in the trust policy:
   - `job_workflow_ref` claim must be `{repo owner}/{repo name}/{workflow path}@.*` (case insensitive)

>    - The workflow path should be normalized to `/` path separators at the time of trust policy creation

Reviewer: Is this NuGet.org's responsibility?  Is it as simple as replacing all `\` with `/`?

Author: I think it can be NuGet.org's responsibility, as a nicety. It would be very annoying to get auth errors, just because you copied the relative path from a Windows machine. Yes, it should be that simple.

table in order to express the scoping rules to be copied into the short-lived API key.

A nullable column will be added to the `Credentials` table to refer to the trust policy used to create the short-lived
API key. This will allow package publish operations to audit their related trust policy information.

Deleting a trust policy should have the effect of deleting all related short-lived API keys.

## Trading an OIDC token for an API key

A new endpoint will be needed for trading an bearer token (OIDC token, a JWT) for an API key. The endpoint URL will be
discoverable via the [V3 service index](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/api/overview#service-index) and a new
resource type which is `ApiKeyService/1.0.0`. For NuGet.org, the service index is available at
`https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json`. The new resource URL be something like `https://www.nuget.org/api/v2/api-key`.

```
POST /api/v2/api-key HTTP/1.1
Host: www.nuget.org
Authorization: Bearer {OIDC token}
Content-Type: application/json

{
   "username": "{username of user with trust policy}"
}
```

The response will look like this:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{

>    "api_key": "{short lived API key in clear text}",

Reviewer: I didn't see any explicit mention of how long the short-lived API key will be valid.  I think that's intentional, since we should have some flexibility in adjusting its lifespan.  However, for the sake of argument, what is a reasonable starting point?  30 minutes?

What is the user experience if the short-lived API key expires before they're done publishing and how do they recover?  Or, is the client (NuGet client, here) supposed to automatically reacquire a new API key transparently so that the user never notices the expiration?

I'm trying to understand where this automagical flow might actually break down for users.

Author: > I didn't see any explicit mention of how long the short-lived API key will be valid. I think that's intentional, since we should have some flexibility in adjusting its lifespan. However, for the sake of argument, what is a reasonable starting point? 30 minutes?

I actually thought I documented. I did not 😂. I was planning on using 15 minutes. This is what PyPI uses and it should have good coverage for our push patterns. I will add supporting data.

   "expires": "{ISO 8601 timestamp of expiration}"
}
```

Authorization failures on this endpoint must return HTTP 401 Unauthorized with an `WWW-Authenticate: Bearer` response
header.

> The package source MUST NOT opt to return the an existing compatible API key (i.e. it must not cache the API key for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The package source MUST NOT return an existing compatible API key (e.g. it must not cache the API key for
```

Returning an existing, long-lived API should also be forbidden.  (That's why I changed i.e. to e.g., because caching isn't the only reason.)

You could even explicitly state this:  The package source MUST NOT return an existing API key and MUST generate a new one on demand.

Author: I think both the MUST NOT and MUST as you state is the clearest. Thanks!

subsequent calls). To do so would require the original API key to be stored in plain text. NuGet.org API keys are hashed

> prior to storage (much like standard recommendations around storing passwords). The the package source has concerns on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prior to storage (much like standard recommendations around storing passwords). The package source has concerns on
```

scalability it must opt to rate limit the endpoint instead of caching. NuGet.org will rate limit the endpoint to 1 API

> key created per 30 seconds, per user.

Reviewer: I don't grok how this limit aligns with someone publishing many packages in a short period of time.  Consider the .NET team publishing packages in bulk to NuGet.org.  Will that translate to hundreds or thousands of API calls within a short timeframe?  Or, is the API key cached and reused on the client side?

It would be good to discuss here how you see this limitation not being a problem for various publishing scenarios.

Author: > Will that translate to hundreds or thousands of API calls within a short timeframe? Or, is the API key cached and reused on the client side?

I expect the API key to be cached on the client side. In most workflows (no custom scripting), this will be done by a single `nuget/login` workflow step with a single output value, which is the short lived API key. This could be used one or more push operations (all referring to the single step output == single API key). I imagine most users will do `dotnet nuget push *.nupkg` which internally does multiple push operations with a single API key provided via CLI arg.

Reviewer: Suppose `dotnet nuget push *.nupkg` takes longer than 15 minutes.  Imagine lots of packages, slow network, whatever.  Will NuGet client automatically re-request a new token via `nuget/login` midstream, as necessary?

Author: Not with this version of the proposal. See the https://github.com/NuGet/Home/blob/jver-oidc/accepted/2024/trusted-publishers-oidc-for-nuget-push.md#enable-nuget-authentication-provider-integration-to-avoid-token-expiration-for-long-workflows.

The user will be able to work around the issue with multiple `nuget/login` GitHub Actions steps and breaking up the push steps. It's not a great solution, but the data suggests we can pick a single short lifetime (15 minutes) and cover the vast majority of cases.

that other one should be read first.

Much of the technical explanation is described in [Trusted Publishers for All Package
Repositories](https://repos.openssf.org/trusted-publishers-for-all-package-repositories). I will expand on certain
technical details which are particularly interesting or specific to NuGet.

## Validation of the GitHub OIDC token

The most critical step in this design is understanding how NuGet.org will validate that an incoming OIDC token is
acceptable to trade for a short-lived NuGet API key.

The following checks are made:

- The token is issued by a known Trusted Publisher (only GitHub Actions at this time)
- The token is validated per all JWT rules, such as but not limited to:
  - valid signature via JWKS
  - validate duration (`nbf` and `exp` claims)
  - only used once, via `jti`
  - valid `aud` claim, being `nuget`

The
[Microsoft.IdentityModel.Protocols.OpenIdConnect](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.IdentityModel.Protocols.OpenIdConnect)
package can help us properly validate JWTs in our NuGet/NuGetGallery ASP.NET application.

> In addition to the general JWT checks, specific checks are made for each Trusted Publisher. For GitHub Actions, the

Reviewer 2: If it's helpful, for build provenance for Sigstore, we mapped token claims to what they represent for each CI provider - https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio/blob/main/docs/oid-info.md#mapping-oidc-token-claims-to-fulcio-oids. This mapping might help if you want a table that maps claims for different providers.

Author: Good point. I think I will do this later when we consider a second Trusted Publisher platform. Then we can compare apples to apples with GitHub Actions.

token trade endpoint.

The `nuget/login` action could be implemented so that it supports and V3 package source, as long as it has a
`TokenService/1.0.0` resource in the service index. This level of flexibility should be implemented anyways so that it
can be tested against NuGet DEV and INT pre-production environments.

It would be the responsibility of the package source to implement OIDC token validation as well as expressing trust
policies.

## Auditing usage on NuGet.org

To help us understand the success of this feature and record priviledged actions for security auditing, we will at least
record minimal information about the OIDC token trade, such as the repository owner, repository name, workflow path,
etc. Existing auditing for API key usage will be used anywhere the short-lived API key is used.

The metadata available in a GitHub Actions OIDC token is mentioned in GitHub's [Understanding the OIDC
token](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/deployment/security-hardening-your-deployments/about-security-hardening-with-openid-connect#understanding-the-oidc-token).

> These claims could offer useful indicators to package consumers about the package. In order to support a future effort

Reviewer 2: This comment is orthogonal for trusted publishing, but I might avoid discussing SLSA Build L1 - It doesn't add much given it's not a signed attestation and if the registry was constructing the provenance, then it requires trust in the registry that it properly recorded the claims, rather than the builder.

Author: That's a fair point. I do want to mention SLSA Build levels to come extent, at least to say this does NOT provided L2+! I talked to Zach S. on the OpenSSF Slack. He said using this information would be L1 but it's not great since it is tamperable. I would say this metadata is better than package author-attested repo/project URL since the consumer needs to just trust the registry and GitHub Actions, but it's not as good as a proper signed provenance thing.

This is the technical description of the experience described in [Trusted Publishers, using OpenID Connect for NuGet
push](trusted-publishers-oidc-for-nuget-push.md). The content is split to clearly separate the functional/UX description
(the other doc) from the technical description (this doc). This document acts as a supporting document to the other so
that other one should be read first.

Much of the technical explanation is described in [Trusted Publishers for All Package
Repositories](https://repos.openssf.org/trusted-publishers-for-all-package-repositories). I will expand on certain
technical details which are particularly interesting or specific to NuGet.

## Validation of the GitHub OIDC token

The most critical step in this design is understanding how NuGet.org will validate that an incoming OIDC token is
acceptable to trade for a short-lived NuGet API key.

The following checks are made:

- The token is issued by a known Trusted Publisher (only GitHub Actions at this time)
- The token is validated per all JWT rules, such as but not limited to:
  - valid signature via JWKS
  - validate duration (`nbf` and `exp` claims)
  - only used once, via `jti`

>   - valid `aud` claim, being `nuget`

Reviewer 3: Note that although it's not true for GHA, with other IdPs it's possible to generate/provide an OIDC token with multiple `aud` claims which is supported by the OIDC spec: https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#:~:text=REQUIRED.%20Audience(s,case%2Dsensitive%20string.

You may want to additionally verify that _only_ the `nuget` audience is included in the token, to ensure that users aren't potentially sharing nuget-enabled OIDC tokens with additional audiences.

Author: Ah, nice call out. I didn't know multiple audiences was possible. Yes, there should be exactly one and it should be a well-defined "nuget" value.

  - The suffix of the `sub` is implied by the other checks
  - Example, when an environment is set: `repo:octo-org/octo-repo:environment:Production`
  - Example, for a specific branch and no environment is set: `repo:octo-org/octo-repo:ref:refs/heads/demo-branch`
- `repository_owner` claim matches the `{repo owner}` name (case insensitive)
- `repository_owner_id` claim matches the numeric owner ID recorded at the time of the trust policy creation
  - This is to avoid resurrection attacks.
- `repository` claim matches the `{repo name}` name (case insensitive)
- `repository_id` claim matches the numeric repository ID recorded at the time of the trust policy creation
  - This is to avoid resurrection attacks.
- If a branch filter is provided in the trust policy:
  - `ref_type` claim must be `branch`
  - `ref` claim must be `refs/head/{branch}` (case sensitive, branch names of differing case can coexist, branch match supports wildcards)
- If an environment filter is provided in the trust policy:
  - `environment` claim must be `{environment}` (case insensitive)
- If a workflow path filter is provided in the trust policy:

>    - `job_workflow_ref` claim must be `{repo owner}/{repo name}/{workflow path}@.*` (case insensitive)

Reviewer 3: I _think_ this should be case sensitive? The workflow path at least is definitely case sensitive.

Author: I chose to relax case sensitivity here due to Windows being a case insensitive file system. I don't feel too strongly, but it seems like a silly reason to reject a token JUST because the case was wrong, assuming everything else matches.

Reviewer 3: Since GitHub is case sensitive, it does mean that more than one workflow could gain the ability to publish. In practice I think that would be fairly uncommon (probably mostly indicative of a typo) but might be a surprising side effect.

Author: Yes, that could be weird. I am not sure if GH has mitigations in place for multiple files of the same case. I'll listen for other input on this, and we can make a call during implementation.

A nullable column will be added to the `Credentials` table to refer to the trust policy used to create the short-lived
API key. This will allow package publish operations to audit their related trust policy information.

Deleting a trust policy should have the effect of deleting all related short-lived API keys.

## Trading an OIDC token for an API key

A new endpoint will be needed for trading an bearer token (OIDC token, a JWT) for an API key. The endpoint URL will be
discoverable via the [V3 service index](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/api/overview#service-index) and a new
resource type which is `TokenService/1.0.0`. For NuGet.org, the service index is available at
`https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json`. The new resource URL be something like `https://www.nuget.org/api/v2/token`.

This new resource will be referred to as the **token service**. This generic name will allow for future dynamic
authorization scenarios beyond trading a bearer token for a NuGet API key.

```
POST /api/v2/token HTTP/1.1
Host: www.nuget.org
Authorization: Bearer {OIDC token}
Content-Type: application/json

{
   "username": "{username of user with trust policy}"

> }

Reviewer 3: Mostly curious: why is `username` necessary here? Shouldn't the OIDC token always map 1:1 with a configuration/policy?

Author: In this design a trust policy is attached to a user. Inside the trust policy, the user specifies which user/org the trust policy is scoped to (to handle the `“Pending” Trusted Publishers` problem mentioned in Seth's doc) -- a user can publish packages as themselves or to an organization they are a memeber of. So this `username` parameter specifies the user profile than holds the trust policy. 

There is no enforcement of 1:1 mapping planned. If we did want to enforce a 1:1 mapping we'd have to decide who (which NuGet.org user profile) gets preference. A first come first service basis would be weird too -- who would win?

I think is it better to allow users to set up whatever trust policy they want and require this additional parameter during token trade. The token trade would first fetch all trust policies for that username and see if any of them apply to the incoming token.

As an added benefit this would allow a future model where the trust policy is attached to an organization directly (instead of one of the admins). But this is not planned yet and we're more approaching this as a way to mint short-lived API keys which are only owned by users today.

Reviewer 3: Got it, so the configuration of the `nuget/login` would need to include a single username as well, correct? I'm imagining that it might be hard to determine who this user would be in the case of a project with multiple maintainers. Does this also mean that the projects other maintainers have no way to administer the publisher?

(For context, in PyPI's implementation, publishers map to projects, not users, and all owners/maintainers of a given project can change/configure publishers for that project. But that does require 'pending publishers', which is a little awkward UX-wise, but seems to work)

Author: Thank you for testing my logic here! I really appreciate it!

Yes, `nuget/login` would have a username provided. I have a bit of sample YAML in the spec (exact shape TBD):
```yaml
      - name: NuGet login
        uses: nuget/login@v1
        id: login
        with:
          user: joelverhagen # this is the user profile which has the GitHub Actions trust policy
          source: https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json
```

> I'm imagining that it might be hard to determine who this user would be in the case of a project with multiple maintainers.

Yes, this is not great. But it is the current problem we have with "who owns the long lived" API key, so it's not worse than what we have today. If a user is concerned about sharing their user profile name it could be a GitHub secret variable `NUGET_USERNAME`. 

> Does this also mean that the projects other maintainers have no way to administer the publisher?

The term `publisher` is not well defined in NuGet world, but when used that typically refers to the visible owner (user/org) of the package. But I think based on that PyPI definition I think that a PyPI project is equivalent to a NuGet.org package ID (sometimes called package registration). I don't think we would want to attach trust policies to a package ID since orgs have many many package IDs (hundreds) and they would need to set the policy on all those places (painful). I guess .NET people like a bunch of little packages for some reason 😆.

Suppose a core contributor on a GitHub repo disappears and another contributor needs to publish a new version of the package(s). They would add an equivalent trust policy to their user account scoped to the org (or user co-owner) that owns the GitHub repo's packages and then specify their username in the token trade as we discussed above.

I think this is the PyPI + NuGet term mapping (did this mainly to get my head straight)

PyPI | NuGet.org | Notes 
--- | --- | ---
Project | Package ID / Package Registration
Release | Package version | Sometimes just called "package" in NuGet, confusingly
Collaborator / Maintainer (?) | Owner | Can be a user or organization on NuGet.org, not sure about PyPI
Organization | Organization | Looks like creating these has an approval flow on PyPI, unlike NuGet.org
User | User | These seem to have equivalent usages

NuGet.org MAY record the JWT and related details (e.g. JWKS) for auditing and feature adoption purposes.

NuGet.org will produce API keys that last 15 minutes, but this value is subject to change as we learn more about how
this feature is used in practice. PyPI uses this duration ([source](https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/)). Also,
15 minutes will support about 99% of push sessions on NuGet.org. For the sake of this analysis, a push session is a
sequence of push operations from a distinct package owner set, where the pushes are no more than 5 minutes apart. Below

> is a table of push sessions of various durations. The difference between 15 minute and 1 hour API key life givens less

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is a table of push sessions of various durations. The difference between 15 minute and 1 hour API key life gives less
```
